This text begins at the start of Anatomy of a Domain Name in week 4
    Any given domain name has three parts:
    Subdomain (or host name): www
    Domain: name block
    TLD: ex: .com
    Fully qualified domain name is all of these put together
    ICANN handles TLD names
    (Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers)
    Domains are used to demarcate where control moves from a TLD name server to an authoritative name server
    A registrar is a company that has an agreement with ICANN to sell unregistered domain names
    DNS can technically support up to 127 levels of domain in total for a single fully qualified name
    Each individual section can onlly be 63 characters long and a complete FQDN is limited to a total of 255 characters

    DNS Zones:
    Each TLD name server is responsible for it's root zone, and each root is responsible for each underneath
    They're actually authoritative servers, but just much smaller responsibliity
    the reason for DNS zones is to allow for easier control over multiple levels
    SPlitting configurations allows for easier organization
    Zone files are simple configuration files that declare all resource records for a particular zone
    a zone file has to contain an SOA or start of Authority resource record delcartion
    This SOA record declares the zone and name of the server that is it's Authority
    Normally these files also contain NS records, which indicate other name servers that are also repsonible for this zone
    Having multiple servers in place means it decentralizes, so if one fails you have others that are able to find the information
    Reverse lookup zone files - let DNS ressolvers ask for an IP and get the FQDN associate with it returned

    DHCP
    Every computer on a modern TCP/IP based network needs to have at least four things specifically configured:
        1. An IP Adresss
        2. The subnet mask
        3. A primary gateway
        4. A name server
    Three are mostly the same on every node: The subnet mask, the primary gateway and the DNS server
    Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol is an application layer protocol that automates the configuartion
    process of hosts on a network. A machine can query a DHCP server and recieve all it's configuration for the network in one go

    DHCP reduces administartion, and makes IP choice for the admin
    Using DHCP you can consistently make sure every 

    Dynamic allocation  a range of IP addresses is set aside for client devices and one of these IP's is issued to these devices when requested
    Automatic allocation a range of IP addresses is set aside for assignment purposes only
    DHCP is in charge or remembering all IP's assigned to a MAC address
    Fixed allocation requires a manually specified list of MAC adresses and their assigned IP
    In fixed allocation DHCP must search is ARP table to find the IP/MAC address, if unable to find it may assign a new one, or not assign at all
    DHCP could also be used to establish NTP (network time protocol servers) used to keep all computers on a network synchronized in time

    DHCP in action 
    DHCP is a application layer protocol that relies on the other layers to be functioning in order to work
    DHCP discovery is the process in which a client configured to use DHCP attempt to get network configuration information
    It's split into the following steps:
        1. Server discovery
            The DHCP client sends a DHCP discovery message. Since the machine doesn't have an IP, it specially crafts the broadcast message
            DHCP listens on UDP port 67 & these kinds of messages are always sent from UDP port 68
            the discover message is encapsulated in a UDP datagram with the destination port of 67, source of 68.
            this datagram is then encapsulated in an IP datagram with a destination IP of 255.255.255.255 and a source of 0.0.0.0
            This broadcast message would get delivered to every node. If a DHCP server is present it would recieve the message
        2. IP Offer
            Next the DHCP server examines it's own configuration and makes a decision on what IP address to offer, if any.
            This depends on address allocation configuration.
            This response is sent back as a DHCPOFFER sending back using information offered up by the datagram orginally 
        3. DCHP Request
            DHCP Request is the acceptance signal of a IP offered to it
        4. DHCP ACK
            Lastly the DHCP server recieves the message and DHCPACK's back, sending the IP it's allowed the client to have

            All of this is known as the DHCP lease, and it includes an expiration. Anywhere from a few days to only a short amount of time
            When the lease expires, this process would have to renegotiate a lease all over again





