The file contains the notes for Week 5 of Course 2 for the Google IT support Professional

    Introduction to connecting to the internet:
    Desktop, laptops, servers, routers & switches, tablets cell phones atms, industrial equipment, cars and the internet of things.
    End of module goals:
        1. Describe various internet connectivity technologies
        2. Define components of WAN's and outline basics of wireless and cellular networking

    Dial Up, Modems & Point to point protocols:
    Early network tech focused on trying to connect close together computers
    Public switched telephone network (PSTN) or plain old telephone system (POTS) was already a pretty global system,
    so Duke grads used them to create dial up, using a form called USENET
    A dial up connection uses POTS for data transfer, and gets it's name because the connection is established by actually dialing a phone number
    Modem = Modulator/Demodulator
    Baud rate how many bits can be passed across a phone lines in seconds
    110BPS was pretty common back then, but increased to 14.4kbps when Dial-up became a home standard

    What is broadband?
    The term broadband in terms of internet connectivity means any connectivity that isn't dial-up internet
    They're long lasting connections that don't need to be established on each use.
    T-carrier technologies were orginally invented by AT&T in order to transmit multiple phone calls over a single link
    This was very useful for buisnesses that often had multiple people using the same lines at once
    A single photo taken on a smartphone today would've taken 20 minutes just to load on dial-up.
    four most common broadband solutions:
        1. T-Carrier technologies
        2. Digital subscriber lines or DSL 
        3. Cable broadband
        4. fiber connections
    
    T-carrier technologies
    First invented by at&t where multiple calls could happen on the same lines
    Every phone call was made over individual pairs of copper wire before Transmission system 1, the first T-carrier spec (Called T1)
    T1 could carry up to 24 simultanious calls on one twisted pair 
    Each of the 24 channels could carry up to 64kb/s which made the whole thing capable of transmitting 1.544mb/s
    Over the years this has changed to where T1 is just any twisted pair over connection speeds of 1.544 mb/s
    Originally T1 was only used to connect different company sites & other telecom company sites
    when the internet exploded in the 90's buisnesses starting buying T1 installations
    T3 is 28 T1's all multiplexed together to achieve 44.736mb/s 
    These are basically all replaced by Fiber or broadband options

    Digital Subscriber lines
    DSL operates at a different frequency than normal phone calls on the same wire.
    By using this different frequency, DSL was able to send much more data than traditional dial up.
    Because of the different frequencies this also meant that both were able to operate without interfering with one another.
    Unlike dial-up they were able to run for longer distances.
    The two most common types of DSL were:
        ADSL
        (Asymmetric Digital Subscriber Line) features different speeds for incoming & outgoing data, generally this meant faster
        download speeds and slower upload. This worked well for the average home, as they were mostly consumers.
        SDLS
        (Symmetric Digital Subscriber Line) is basically the same as ADSL except upload & download speeds are the same. SDSL was mainly
        used by buisnesses who needed to send data to clients, but is now used by both home and businesses.
        Most SDLS's have a upper cap of 1.544 mb/s, same as a T1 line.
        Further development has brought about HDSL (High Bit-rate Digital subscriber lines) these are DSL's that provision speeds above
        1.544 mb/s.

    Cable broadband
        In the 1940's the first TV's were made to operate on cables instead of towers.
        1984 Cable Communications policy act deregulated the cable television buisness, alloiwng for massive growth. 
        by 1990 cabnle television infrastructure in the US was about the size of POTS

        Cable companies quickly realized that coaxial cables used by televisions were capable of transmitting much more data than a TV needed.
        By using a different frequency on the same cable, companies were able to transmit data of internet based applications at a very high speed.
        at the edge of consumer's network connecting their network to the ISP's core network is a Cabler modem, which connects to the CMTS (Cable Modem Termination System)

    Fiber Connections
    The core of the internet is built off fiber for faster connectivity and lower drop rate over longer areas by using light.
    The maximium distance an electric signal can travel across a copper wire before it degrades too much is thousands of feet.
    Fiber can travel many miles before degrading.
    Producing & laying fiber is very expensive, so it used to be only used by data centers & ISP
    FTTX (Fiber to the X) Fiber laying closer to clients became more previlant so this term was used
        (FTTN) Fiber to the Neighborhood, fiber is laid out to a cabinet serving a large community

            {FTTB Fiber to the building, this is a setup where fiber technologies are used for data delivery to an individual building
            FTTH Fiber to the home, this is used in instances where fiber is run to each home or apartment complex.} May also be reffered to as FTTP
            or fiber to the premises. Instead of a modem, the demarcation point for fiber technologies is known as the Optical Network Terminator or ONT.
            ONT converts data from protocols the fiber network can understand
            
    Other information:
        PPP subprotocols include:
            Link control Protocol (LCP) - a subprotocol that initiates and terminates connections automatically for hosts
            Network Control Protocol (NCP) - a subprotocol that is used to negotiate optional configuration parameters and facilities for the network layer 
            
    
    WAN (Wide Area Network Technologies)
        Wide area networks act like a single network but span across multiple physical layer locations

        WANS typically have a few sections:
        say one office is setup on one network, and the home office is setup on another one. Each of the networks ends at a demarcation point
        that demarcation point is where the ISP takes over, and creates a local loop. A local loop is the area between the demarcation points and
        the ISP's core network. This one in particular would be something like a T-carrier line or high speed optical connection to the ISP's local regional office
    
        Wans work by using a few different protocols at the data-link layer, these protcols are similar to the ones that run the internet.

    Supplimental reading for WAN's

        There are physical or software based WANs.
        A physical WAN has a WAN router, which acts as an intermediate system to route data amongst the LAN member groups. 
        (Also claled WAN endpoints) using a private connection. WAN routers may also be called border routers or edge routers
        These routers facilitate an organizations access to a carrier network.
        WAN routers have a digital modem interface, which works at the OSI link layer, and an ethernet interface for LAN

        Software-Defined WAN (SD-WAN)
        Software developed for cloud based WAN environments. SD-WAN's can be used alone or in conjunction with physical, traditional WANS.
        
        Optimization of WANs:
        Compression: reduce file sizes at the reciever & sender with the same compression & decompression protocols
        Deduplication: Prevent multiple file copies at multiple locations and keep all them in a single database.
        Protocol Optimization: Improve efficiency of network protocols for applications that require more bandwidth.
        Local Caching: storing local copies of network and internet files to limit DNS requests. Keeping shared files at a physical LAN
        location where they are often requested to limit the number of far reaching requests, as well as optimize availibility of data
        bandwith throttling: controlling network traffic during peak use
        rate limiting- capping max data rates
        use of complex algorithms- classifying and prioritizing data to give preferences to important traffic

        WAN protocols:
        Packet switching: 
            Messages are broken into multiple packets, each packet contains a header
            that includes information on how to reassemble the packets as well as the intended destination. 
            Packets are triplicated to prevent data corruption and sent across the most optimal route to the receiver. 
            Triplicated copies are compared to rebuild corrupted data

        Frame relay: data transmission method.:
            Frame relay is an older teh originally designed for integrated services digital network (ISDN)
            Frame relays transmit data between endpoints of a WAN through packet switching method that works at the OSI data link and physical layers
            Frame Relay Networks transport datagrams in frames, due to reliablity in frame relay networks the need for error checking is minimized
            The frames include routing address information for the destination.
                Permanent Virtual circuits (PVC)- Used for long term data connections, stay open even when not transmitting
                Switched Virtual Circuits (SVC)- Used in temporary session connections for sporadic Communications.

        Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM)
            ATM is an older tech that encodes data using asynchronous time-division multiplexing.
            The encoded data is packaged into fix-sized cells, then sent over a long distance. ATMs use routers as end points
            between ATM networks and other networks. ATM has mostly been replaced by IP

        High Level Data Control (HLDC)
            An encapsulation or data link protocol that delivers data frames through a network. The frames include multiple fields
            that hold information about start & end flags, controls, Frame check Sequence and protocol used. HLDC was developed to use
            multiple protocols to replace SLDC. HDLC includes error correction, flow control, and data transmission. It has three modes:
                Normal Response Mode (NRM) - Primary node must give permission to the secondary node to transmit.
                Asynchronous Response Mode (ARM) - Primary node allows the secondary node to initiate Communications
                Asynchronous Balanced Mode (ABM) - Both nodes can act as either the primary or secondary nodes. They can initiate communication between each other

        Packet over Synchronous Optical Network (SONET) or Synchronous Digital Hierarchy (SDH):
            A communication protocol used for WAN transport. 
            The SONET or SDH communcation protocols define how point-to-point links communicate over fiber optics cables.

        Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS):
            A technique for optimizing network routing. MPLS replaces inefficient table lookups for long network addresses with short path labels. These labels direct data from 
            node to node.
    
    Point-to-Point VPNs:
    Point-to-Point VPNs are a popular alternitive for WANs
    WANs are useful for transferring large amounts of data over lots of sites.
    Due to cloud based computing, the need for WANs is decreasing as companies outsource their connections.
    This is done using site-to-site or point-to-point VPNs which operate a lot like traditional VPN's except they just connect the
    two sites through a VPN tunnel

    Introduction to wireless network technologies
    Wireless networking is a way to network without wires
    End of lesson goals:
        1. Know the difference between ad hoc & infrastructure networks
        2. Explain how wireless channels help wireless networks operate
        3. Understand the basics of wireless security protocols

    most common specifications for how wireless networking devices should communicate are defined by the IEEE 802.11 standards
    802.11 family AKA, makes up WIFI. Generally all use the same protocols by operate on different frequency bands.
    A frequency band is a certain section of the radio spectrum that's been agreed upon to be used for certain Communications
    In north America FM radio operates between 88 & 108 megahertz this frequency band is called the FM band
    most wifi operates on either 2.4 Ghz or 5Ghz frequency bands
    lots of 802 specifications most common are:
        802.11b
        802.11a
        802.11g
        802.11n
        802.11ac
    each newer version is normally some kind of improvement over the other.
    wireless access point is a device that bridges the wireless and wire portions of a network.
    a single wireless network may have lots of access points, and devices connected to the network associate with the closest access point.
    best way to think about 802.11 protocols are the physical and data link layers
    an 802.11 frame:
        Frame control field- 16 bit long and contains a number of subfields that are used to describe how the frame should be processed
            This includes things like what version of 802.11 was used.
        Duration field - specifies how long the total frame is so the receiver knows how long is should expect to listen to the transmission.
        After this are four address fields for room to indicate which access point should be processing frame.
        1st address field: Source MAC address
        2nd address field: Intended destination
        3rd address field: Receiving address (MAC address of the access point that should receive frame)
        Sequence control field - 16 bits long and mainly contains a sequence number used to keep track of the ordering of frames 
        4th address field: Transmitter address (MAC address of whatever just transmitted the frame)
        Data payload - Has all of the data of the protocols further up the stack
        Frame Check sequence field - Contains a checksum used for a cyclical redundancy check, just like how ethernet does it.

    Supplemental reading for Wi-Fi 6:
    Wifi 6 network protocol is faster and more efficent for larger networks. Benefits include:
        Higher data rates via band splitting or increased client group sizes
        Increased band capacity: band utilization increased from 80mHz to 160mHz
        Better performance: The input/output streams are doubled from the 4 by 4 allowed by wifi 5 to 8 by 8 in wifi 6
        Improved power efficiency: Devices only connect when sending or receiving data, increasing battery life.

    Capabilities:
        Channel sharing
        Target Wake Time (TWT) - improves network speed and increases battery life by allowing battery-powered 
        devices to sleep when not in use.
        Multi-user MIMO (Multiple Input, Multiple Output) - Wireless technology allows more data to be transferred
        simultaneously. This ability increases capacity and efficency in high bandwith applications.
        160 mHz channel utilization
        1024 Quadrature amplitude modulation combines two singals into a single channel to encode more data
        Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiple Access (OFDMA) allows for bandwidth splitting which is assigned dynamically by the access point to separate devices.
        Transmit beamforming is a technique that sends signals that allow for more efficient higher data rates by targeting each connected device

    Wifi 6E extends Wifi 6 into 6GHz
        Wifi 6e is an additional certification for wifi 6 that has all the feature of wifi 6 but adds a 6GHz band.

    Key takeaways:
        Wifi technology will continue to change as the needs of users and companies change.
        Wi-Fi 6 uses technologies like those listed in capabilities to increase quality of a network.
        Wifi 6e is an additional certification of wifi 6 that has faster speeds and better performance

    Wireless network configurations:
    Ad-hoc networks where nodes all speak directly to one another 
        Every device involved communicates directly with one another, and all the nodes help pass along the messaging. Ad-hoc is
        the simplest, but not the most common. Airdrop is an example of an ad-hoc connection.
        ad-hoc networks may be used in industrial or warehouse settings where nodes communicate directly with one another, and
        they're also useful in disaster situations where it's peer-peer Communications.
    Wlans
        These are the most common types of networks in the buisness world. They consist of one or more access points, which act
        like the bridges between the wireless and wired netowrks. The wired network operates as a normal LAN, but in order to reach
        outside the network the LANS communicate with the WLAN who then forward information onto the gateway router.
    Mesh networks
        Devices communicate with each other directly, forming a mesh. These networks still contain wired connections, and are often
        used to increase the performance and range of a wireless network.

    Wireless channels:
        Channels are individual smaller sections of the overall frequency band used by a wireless network.
        They help address collision Domains
            (REMINDER Collision domains are any one network segment where one computer can interrupt each other)
        Switches remember which computers live on which physical interface, which is how collision domains are avoided in physical
        networks. Since software networks don't have phsyical interfaces for wireless devices, wireless devices would just talk over one another.
        This is solved (partially) by channels. These channels help separate the noise by breaking into frequencies.
        When saying that a channel operaters on 2.4 ghz band we mean it operates roughly between the 2.4 gHz to 2.5 gHz. 
        Between these two frequencies are where channels live.
        Channels available for use depend on the regulatory committies based on location, since those committies decide frequencies
        802.11b network would have channel one operate between 2401mghz and 2423 mghz 
        radio waves are rather imprecesise so you need some buffer between them.

    Wireless security
        When sending over wired connections, you have some privacy as only the end to end pieces know the data being exchanged
        some devices in nearby proximity to wifi connections are able to pickup packets that travel through the air
        WEP (Wired equivalent privacy) - an encryption technology that provides a very low level of privacy 
            Basically as safe as sending unencrypted data over a wired connection. only uses 40 bit encryption
        WPA (wifi protected access)- standardly used encryption protocol using 128 bits
        WPA2 - an updated version to WPA, uses a 256 bit encryption Key
        MAC filtering- configuring your access points to only allow for connections from a specific set of MAC addresses belonging to 
        devices you trust

    WPA3 Key Takeaways:
        WPA3-Personal new features:
        Natural Password selection
        increased ease of use
        forward secrecy
        simultaneous authentication of equals (SAE)

        WPA3-Enterprise:
        Galois/Counter Mode Protocol (GCMP-256)
        Opportunistic Wireless Encryption (OWE)
        Wi-Fi Device Provisioning Protocol (DPP)
        384-bit Hashed message authentication mode (HMAC) with Secure Hash Algorithm (SHA)
        Elliptic Curve Diffie-Hellman Exchange (ECDHE) and Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm (ECDSA)
    
    Cellular networking
        aka mobile networking
        Cellular networks are very similar to 802.11
        operating over radio frequencies, but these frequencies travel much further
        Cellular networks are built around the concepts of cells, each cell is assigned a specific frequency band for use
        and neighbors are setup so bands don't overlap just like multiple access points for Wlans
        Cell towers are basically large range access points

    Mobile device networks
        Cellular networks
        Wifi
        Bluetooth
        Internet of Things network protocols

    Other important information:
        Another (more accurate name) for a DSL modem is a DSLAM (Digitial Subscriber Line access multiplexer)


        


        

    
  